📘 Learning Journal for SGMS Version 2

I) Dictionary Integration

1. Data Structure Change (students storage)

Mistake:
Got confused and tried to predefine keys like "name" and "marks" inside the main dictionary.

Problem:
That structure only supports a single student and does not allow dynamic data storage.

Learning:
For dictionary-based storage:

Initialize an empty dictionary → students = {}
Data should be added dynamically at runtime using user input
The dictionary grows as new key-value pairs are inserted


2. Feature: Add Student (Dictionary Logic)

Mistake:

Tried to use list mindset (append())
Stored "student_name" as a string instead of variable

Assigned incorrect value like:

students[student_name] = student_name
Forgot to handle duplicate entries

Problem:

Data was not stored in correct structure
Marks were not linked to the student
Duplicate students could overwrite existing data

Learning:

In dictionaries, use assignment → students[key] = value
student_name (user input) becomes the key
Value should store student data → { "marks": [] }
No need to store name again inside value (avoid duplication)

Always check:

if student_name in students

to prevent overwriting existing records

✅ Final Understanding

List → append()
Dictionary → key-based assignment

Data is not predefined → it is built dynamically during execution

VVIMP -->
List → store data in order
Dictionary → store data with meaning (key-based)


3. Helper Function: search_student()

Mistake (from V1 thinking):

Tried to use loop and indexing like:

for student in students:
    if student[0] == search
Mixed list logic with dictionary

Problem:

Dictionary does not use index-based access
Loop is unnecessary and inefficient

Correction:

Used direct key lookup:

if search in students

Returned student data using:

students[search]
Returned None if not found

Learning:

In dictionaries, searching is done using direct key lookup, not loops

4. Feature Function: find_student()

Mistake:

Confusion about where to print output

Initially tried incorrect condition like:

if student in students
Placed return before print (breaking flow)

Problem:

Logic and user interaction were mixed incorrectly
Wrong condition check (student is data, not key)
Code after return was not executing

Correction:

Took input and passed to helper function
Stored result in variable

Checked:

if student is None
Printed result in this function (not in helper)
Returned student for reuse

Learning:

Helper functions should handle logic only, while feature functions handle input/output and result display

✅ Final Understanding

List → loop-based search
Dictionary → key-based direct lookup


5. Feature: Add Marks (Dictionary-Based Update)

Mistake:

Initially tried:

students[student_name] = marks

Also tried incorrect method:

student["marks"].add_marks()

Problem:

First approach overwrote entire student record, removing dictionary structure
Second approach used a non-existent list method
Did not correctly update nested data

Correction:

Used helper function to get student record:

student = search_student(student_name)

Checked if student exists:

if student is not None

Added marks using:

student["marks"].append(marks)

Learning:

When working with nested data (dictionary inside dictionary), update the inner structure instead of overwriting the outer structure

Lists use append() to add values, not custom methods

✅ Final Understanding
student → stores student data (not name)
"marks" → list inside dictionary
New marks → appended to existing list


6. Feature: Calculate Average (Dictionary-Based Access)

Mistake (from V1 thinking):

Earlier accessed marks using list indexing:

student[1]
Structure-dependent and less clear

Problem:

Index-based access is not applicable for dictionary
Code becomes less readable and harder to maintain

Correction:

Accessed marks using key:

marks = student["marks"]

Used this variable for further calculation:

sum(marks) / len(marks)

Learning:

In dictionaries, data should be accessed using meaningful keys instead of index positions

Store frequently used data in a variable to improve readability and avoid repetition

✅ Final Understanding
student → full student data
"marks" → key to access marks list
marks → used for calculation


7. Feature: Delete Student (Dictionary-Based Removal)

Mistake:

Initially tried:

del student
Also used list-based thinking like remove()
Tried using find_student() which caused duplicate input handling

Problem:

student is only a variable holding data, not the actual dictionary entry
Deleting it does not remove data from the main dictionary
Using find_student() caused unnecessary input repetition

Correction:

Took student name as input

Used helper function:

student = search_student(student_name)

Deleted student using key:

del students[student_name]

Learning:

In dictionaries, deletion is always performed using keys, not values

Helper functions should be used when input is already available, to avoid duplicate input handling

Deleting a variable does not remove data from the main data structure

✅ Final Understanding
students → main dictionary
student_name → key
deletion → removes entire record using key


8. Feature: View Students (Dictionary-Based Iteration)

Mistake:

Initially checked:

if students is None

Tried printing entire dictionary directly:

print(students)

Problem:

Dictionary is never None, even if empty
Direct printing shows raw structure (not user-friendly)

Correction:

Used:

if not students

to check if dictionary is empty

Iterated through dictionary:

for student_name in students

Accessed data using key:

students[student_name]["marks"]

Printed data in structured format:

Name: <name>, Marks: <marks list>

Learning:

In dictionaries, loops return keys, not values

Use keys to access corresponding values

Structured printing improves readability over raw data output

✅ Final Understanding
student_name → key
students[student_name] → value
"marks" → nested list


II) File Handling

🔹 Mistake / Problem

Initially, my program was storing all student data only in memory (students list/dictionary).

When the program was closed, all data was lost
There was no persistence mechanism
I did not understand how to store program data externally

While implementing file handling, I also had confusion about:

When to save data
Where to load data
How JSON works with Python dictionaries
Handling case when file does not exist
🔹 What I Did / Solution

I implemented file handling using the json module.

1. Created save_data() function
Used with open("students.json", "w")
Used json.dump(students, file)
This stores the entire dictionary into a file

2. Created load_data() function
Used json.load() to read file data
Used try-except to handle missing file
If file not found → return empty dictionary

3. Connected program with file
Replaced:
students = {}

with:

students = load_data()

4. Applied saving logic correctly

Called save_data() only in functions where data changes:

add_student()
add_marks()
delete_student()

Did NOT use save in:

search / find
view
calculations

🔹 Key Learning

File handling enables data persistence across program runs
json.dump() → Python → JSON file
json.load() → JSON file → Python
try-except is necessary to handle missing files safely
Save operation should only happen when data is modified
Helper/read functions should NOT handle saving

🔹 Final Understanding

My program now behaves like a real system where data is stored permanently and can be reused after restarting.

I learned how to connect:

Memory (dictionary)
File storage (JSON)
Program execution flow

🔹 Improvement Insight

Initially I treated file handling as a separate feature
Now I understand it as part of system design




III) Separation of Logic and User Functions

In this step, I refactored the code by separating reusable logic from user interaction functions to improve structure and scalability.

🔹Extracted core logic into helper functions such as search_student(search), calculate_average_logic(student) and assign_grade_logic(average), which take input parameters and return results without handling user input or printing output.

🔹Ensured that helper functions remain pure and reusable by avoiding any direct interaction with the user or global flow.

🔹Modified user functions like calculate_average(), assign_grade(), and display_report() to handle input, call helper functions, and display results.

🔹Replaced repeated logic (average calculation and grade assignment) with calls to helper functions, reducing code duplication.

🔹Established a clear flow of data: student → average → grade, where the output of one function is passed as input to another (function chaining).

This refactoring improved code readability, reusability, and maintainability, and introduced a clean separation of concerns similar to real backend system design.



IV) Input Validation in CLI Programs

In this step, I implemented input validation to make the system robust and prevent invalid or unexpected user inputs.

🔹Used .strip() to remove unnecessary spaces from user input, ensuring that inputs like empty strings or only spaces are handled correctly.

🔹Applied if not input_value to detect empty inputs after stripping.

🔹Implemented try-except (ValueError) while taking marks input to prevent program crashes when non-integer values are entered.

🔹Added range validation (0–100) for marks to ensure only valid academic scores are accepted.

🔹Maintained validation strictly inside user functions, keeping helper functions clean and focused only on logic.

🔹Used the continue keyword in the menu loop to handle invalid or empty choices. When an empty input is detected, continue immediately skips the remaining code in the loop and restarts the next iteration, ensuring the program prompts the user again without executing unintended conditions.

This improved the reliability of the program and ensured safe interaction with user inputs.

